---
layout: post
title: Let's Talk About Rain World!
---

We're not affiliated with Videocult over here at Chris's Project Barn. This post started out as a couple brief recommendations for games that forced me to rethink the boundaries of what games can be as a medium, but I just wanted to talk about *Rain World*, so here we are. 

Alright, I guess I can give you a couple, non-rainy games to look into. Check out *Outer Wilds*. After that, put your headphones on and load up *Hellblade: Senua's Sacrifice*. If you're feeling particularly masochistic today, finish off the session with a bit of *La-Mulana*.

Now it's time for the big one.

## *Rain World*

*Rain World* is the greatest game ever made, bar none. 

I will not be able to explain why in the few words I've given myself, nor do I think I'd be able to in a standard hardback. So I'll make you a deal; if you email me and ask nicely, I will buy you a copy of your own, and you  can find out for yourself. But why should you? Let's find out.

In *Rain World*, you play as a slugcat, a critter who is equally adorable, clever, and tasty. Separated from your family in a storm, you are dropped into a vast ecosystem, and have to fight to carve out your niche within it. I use the word 'ecosystem' because *Rain World* is not a traditional game, with enemies, allies, and so on. Videocult set out to build a game wherein every creature has their own needs, goals, homes, families, and ideas about how our slugcat friend fits into that. Large critters might initially see you as dinner, but you can befriend them, make them fear you, or lead them into a territorial spat with one of their own kind and escape in the chaos. Some creatures have extensive sets of social connections; should the player give them a gift, they'll tell their friends, and your reputation will improve within that network. They might be less prickly with you when you see them in the wild, or they might let you pass a toll they run, or they might even put their lives on the line defending you from ravenous carnivores. If you instead anger them, they might harass you, bar you from certain paths, or (in extreme cases) organize a posse to murder you whenever they see you in their territory. It's the most impressive social behavior I've seen in any game. After many sessions stealing everything that wasn't nailed down in Skyrim and paying off guards to look the other way, only to return to a town that felt completely neutrally about me, *Rain World's* complex social dynamics immersed me so thoroughly I forgot dinner on multiple occasions.

We can each probably name the first few games we played seriously. To us, these games were magical; we'd never experienced anything like them. But as we play more games, we discover patterns in how they're made. If we're falling from a great height to seemingly certain death, we know we can double jump just before impact, or perhaps pull out a parachute to immediately decelerate to a less terminal velocity. If nothing else, we've played enough *Mario* to understand platformers, enough *Minecraft* to understand survival games, and it's because they're sets of tried and tested mechanics that work well and players can latch onto immediately. I bring this up because *Rain World* seems oblivious to this iterative version of game design. It's a platformer where your character can't even really jump well. It's a survival game where you can't amass resources in your home base, because you don't have a home base and you can only carry two things. Perhaps most telling of all, it's a game that never attempts to explain itself further than the bare minimum the player requires to function. Immediately alienating your entire playerbase is perhaps not the best route to mass appeal, but it intensifies the alien-ness of the world. It's like nothing I've ever played, and because of that, it catapulted me right back to the days of my youth, playing *Donkey Kong Country* and *Pokemon Crystal* for the first time, experiencing the magic of pure play untethered from my burden of knowledge.

At its core, *Rain World* is an exploration of Buddhist philosophy in game form. It's about life, death, suffering, and detatchment in an uncaring world. *Rain World* doesn't want the player to succeed, nor does it want them to fail; within its elaborate systems, its beautiful art, its rare but striking music, it wants the player to meditate on this little life they're inhabiting. It wants you to take what you've learned on your journey, maybe not as rules for life, but as thoughts, dreams, hopes, fears, things that dwell in the corners of your mind and creep out when you're walking in a forest, or bubble up to the surface when you're somewhere between awake and asleep. Games can be fun escapes from our everyday, giving us warm, familiar, unchallenging feelings to relax to. Games can be intense expressions of skill and identity, for those competitive enough to pursue them. And sometimes, games can convey ideas, ask questions, and alter us permanently. That can only be called art.

If you want to read more about *Rain World*, [The Experienced Machine](https://experiencedmachine.wordpress.com/2019/09/16/rain-world-reaching-enlightenment-through-unfairness-introduction/) has a wonderful writeup on its themes and how it communicates them, though I wouldn't recommend reading it if you have any desire to play the game spoiler-free. Incidentally, that entire site seems to exist only to talk about *Rain World*, so that's a pretty decent recommendation by itself.